how are today's cruise ships different
from those of titanic's day
sure we all know they're now required to
carry more lifeboats
but that isn't exactly what makes them
the life of the party
let's start with the size everyone knows
that the titanic was the largest ship of
its time
but how big was it exactly the titanic
stretched
882 feet from bow to stern and had a
beam
or width of 92 feet the ship's nine
decks rose to an impressive 175 feet
making it about the height of an 11
story building
designed to carry more than 2 400
passengers
and almost 900 crew members the titanic
had certainly earned its name
even had it managed to avoid the iceberg
the titanic wouldn't have held onto its
title for very long
the ss imperator would steal its crown a
year later
when it undertook his maiden voyage in
1913.
that's right his even though most ships
are referred to with female pronouns
kaiser wilhelm ii specifically requested
the ship
be considered a male it's not entirely
clear why
but one possibility might be grammar
since
imperator meaning emperor is an
exclusively male title in german
as the decades passed ships only got
bigger and bigger
as countries and companies competed for
the crown
as of 2019 the largest cruise ship in
the world
is the symphony of the seas which is
operated by royal caribbean
the symphony dwarfs titanic in every way
1184 feet across and 215 feet wide
her 18 decks are double the titanic's
height and provides spacious
accommodations for well over
5 000 passengers and since we're on the
subject of accommodations
it might be time to talk about the
different purposes these two ships were
created for
the symphony of the seas is a cruise
ship not an
ocean liner like the titanic and
imperator
think of it as the difference between a
city bus and a tour bus
you board a cruise ship to have fun and
an ocean liner when you need to get
somewhere
[Music]
the titanic was constructed in belfast
harbor on a special slipway
built specifically to accommodate its
unprecedented bulk
above the dry dock was a massive steel
structure known as the arrow gantry
this 225 foot tall gantry utilized
numerous cranes for
lifting the large plates into a position
where they then could be
riveted into place many folks don't
realize that there were special green
frogs
up on the gantry whose purpose was to
inspire the workers to
rivet rivet i made that part up
could you tell the hull of the titanic
was made up of thousands of these
overlapping plates with a lower hull
consisting of two layers
this was done to protect the titanic
from damage caused by scraping against
the seabed
unfortunately the damage from the
iceberg was just below the water line
where there was only one layer of
plating between the ocean
and the ship's interior titanic's
primary safety feature
was the 16 watertight compartments
making up the lower decks
the ship was designed to stay afloat
with four of these compartments
completely flooded
again unfortunately the iceberg opened a
long gash
across five of them the chambers also
failed to extend all the way to the top
of the hull
once the water reached the top of the
five breech compartments
it quickly overflowed and spilled into
the others
dragging the ship down at an even
greater speed
ships of today are still made of steel
but advancements in smelting and
metallurgy
have resulted in hulls stronger and less
brittle than were possible 100 years ago
aluminum is also widely used to reduce
the ship's weight
this allows the vessels to achieve their
towering height
while still maintaining a low center of
gravity thanks to the heavy engines and
fuel tanks at the bottom of the hull
the reduced weight also means lower
emissions
speaking of the engines modern cruise
ships run primarily on either diesel
natural gas or some combination of the
two
the vessels that use both often employ
diesel engines for propulsion
and natural gas to drive the motors that
produce electricity
this is a far cry from ships of the
titanic's era which use
coal furnaces to boil the water powering
its steam engines
modern chips may not be emission free
but it's a lot better than belching
clouds of ash and smoke
construction techniques have also
changed over the years
although that's no surprise considering
how radically the ships themselves have
transformed
instead of only having a few large
internal compartments
the internal structure of modern cruise
ships is a vast network of steel webs
radiating inward from the hall with
every fourth web supporting a massive
wall of steel
the girders are concealed within the
walls of the ship
and serve as the vessel's primary
load-bearing structure
remember the titanic didn't sink the
moment it made contact with the ice
it actually took a full two hours and 40
minutes to go under
while that would give the crew more time
to evacuate the passengers
the danger wasn't apparent the whole
time when the order was delivered to don
their life jackets
many treated it as a joke when it came
time to board the lifeboats
many passengers were reluctant believing
themselves safer on the big warm
ship than the tiny open boats that was
part of the reason the first boats out
were among the emptiest
if people were that reluctant to board a
skate craft until it was almost too late
how were the crew going to convince them
to clamor atop a freezing lump of ice
people wouldn't start changing their
tune until much later once the ship
began to visibly tilt
once that happens it would be chaos as
people crowd the gangplank
and struggled across the surface of the
iceberg
making matters worse is that if too many
people tried to cross the plank at once
it could end up snapping this wouldn't
only throw everyone into the freezing
water
but they'd also risk being crushed
between the iceberg and the hull of the
ship
the lifeboats could be used to help with
the evacuation but presented their own
problems
if the people who took the gang plank
would have trouble moving across the
berg
scaling the slopes from the surface of
the water would be even more difficult
and frankly if you were on a lifeboat
would you want to trade it for a giant
hunk of
ice these are all big problems that
would have made
evacuating to the iceberg unfeasible and
we haven't even gotten to the biggest
one on the list
reaching it didn't see that one coming
did you
at first this might seem strange how can
you not be close enough
to the thing you just crashed into
that's like the
ultimate level of proximity well the
titanic didn't exactly grind to a halt
the moment it hit the iceberg
as you might have guessed the ship's
helmsman had been trying to steer away
from the ice before the collision
instead of ramming into the iceberg
head-on the titanic merely grazed its
side
swapping paint in history's worst fender
bender
ironically they might have been better
off with a front on collision
while there would have still been
flooding on the lower decks the water
would have been confined to only a few
of the compartments
the titanic was designed to stay afloat
with up to four of the 16 watertight
compartments flooded
the glancing blow caused a breach in six
which astute viewers will notice
as being two more than the maximum
number
the unsinkable molly brown is one of the
most popular and liked characters in the
1964 movie an
earlier broadway musical based on the
great ship's
unlucky maiden voyage but this woman
wasn't just thought up by some hollywood
screenwriter
she was a real passenger margaret brown
was known
even before the titanic for being one of
the first women in the u.s
to run for office eight years before
women could even vote
she was in london when she found out
that her grandson was sick
so she headed to new york immediately
because
this decision was so last minute very
few people knew that she was on board
the titanic
once the ship struck the iceberg mrs
brown selflessly helped other passengers
into the lifeboats
until getting into one herself
after being rescued by the rms carpathia
she organized a committee with other
first class survivors and carpathia
passengers
the committee would raise money and
provide counseling for the more
destitute people
that lived through the tragedy upon
arriving in new york
she wouldn't leave the rescue ship until
she made sure that every survivor
received medical attention
and found their families mrs brown was
given a medal for her goodwill
in helping the titanic survivors she was
also later awarded the french legion of
honor
for her charitable work rebuilding
france and helping soldiers
a truly extraordinary woman
speaking of incredible women throughout
her career working at sea
miss violet constance jessup survived
not one
but three shipwrecks the titanic
included
she started out as a stewardess on board
the olympic which crashed in 1911.
just seven months later she survived the
titanic
and then went on to serve as a nurse for
the british red cross
hmhs britannic
this ship sank from an explosion but
violet
yet again came out of it and kept
working at sea
this adventurous spirit finally settled
down in great ashfield england
just like margaret brown violet was
often jokingly called miss
unsingable there's definitely truth to
that
the actress dorothy gibson most famous
for her role in the 1912
movie saved from the titanic was
actually one of the survivors of the
catastrophe
she and her mother were coming back to
the u.s on board the titanic after
vacationing in europe
the two had been playing bridge with
some friends when the ships they escaped
together in the half empty lifeboat
number seven
but nearly sank again when one of the
other survivors noticed a hole in the
boat
luckily they were able to plug it up
with some clothes
not long after gibson arrived in new
york aboard the carpathia
her agent convinced her to star in a
movie about the titanic sinking
she wrote the script herself and wore
the same clothes in the movie that she
did on the night of the disaster
the film came out just a month after the
tragedy
dorothy later gave up her acting career
to work in the metropolitan opera
she spent her last years in paris what a
life
if you're interested in seeing it before
it disappears the time
is now in 100 years the site of the
titanic
might have just a few remnants strewn
out on the ocean floor
just make sure you have a big wad of
cash because the experience isn't cheap
a trip to the site will cost you over
one hundred five
thousand dollars per person if the price
makes you think twice
an interesting point is that after
taking inflation into consideration
the price is what some passengers in
first class would have paid
to board the ship back in the day the
current price
is equivalent to 4 350 in 1912.
price notwithstanding seeing the
titanic's wreck is the experience of a
lifetime
if the price is too hefty for your taste
you can go to ireland's titanic museum
or you can wait a few years and head to
the sichuan province in china
where a life-size replica of the titanic
is being constructed
the replica of the titanic will also
include a theme park
it's a multi-million dollar project that
will allow you to walk the same hallways
look at the lavish accommodations and
enjoy the spectacular view from the top
of the ship
just like the original titanic
passengers did
the replica was supposed to be completed
in 2017
but the construction is far from over if
you want a more low-key approach
you can always head to las vegas low-key
to see some of the titanic's artifacts
you can also just cozy up on your couch
with a big box of tissues
and watch the movie for the bazillionth
time
[Music]
people today mock how the titanic was
advertised as unsinkable
but back then it barely even counted as
a boast
regardless of the reason captain smith
chose to continue ahead at full speed
he did have the presence of mind to
order the titanic lookouts to watch for
rice
but due to a clerical error they were
never given binoculars
the lack of lifeboats was also due to a
misunderstanding
of how any potential collisions would
play out and not just because they would
be redundant on an invincible ship
at the time it was generally accepted
that if a ship ever needed to be
abandoned
the passengers and crew would be picked
up by another vessel in the same area
no one had ever anticipated the need to
evacuate
everyone on board onto lifeboats that
also helps to explain
why the evacuation was so disorganized
with many boats leaving only partially
full
while that's a pretty big oversight the
original plan could have worked
if someone had picked up their distress
call in time
you see by 1912 ships weren't yet
required to have someone operating the
radio
24 7. this meant that the radio operator
of the ss californian
the nearest ship and the one titanic's
operator had told to shut up
was asleep when the distress calls went
out
making matters worse was the fact that
the titanic's radio operator
reported the wrong coordinates in his
sos
this meant that even the ships that
received the call had trouble finding
where the titanic had gone down
so those were the main problems facing
the titanic on that fateful night
overconfidence poor communication
insufficient lifeboats
and the inability of rescuers to find
her
now that we've established all that it's
time to answer our main
question what if the titanic disaster
happened today
after the titanic sank many new
procedures were established with the
hope of preventing similar disasters
one of the first was the establishment
of regular ice patrols in that region of
the north atlantic
in the early days this meant guys with
binoculars freezing their noses off in
boats and planes
but fortunately today is not 100 years
ago
another reason today is better than a
century ago is that our iceberg
detection has gotten
a lot more sophisticated the united
states coast guard and canadian eye
service
regularly patrol the area with
radar-equipped hc-130 aircraft
to scan for any icebergs coming too
close to major shipping routes
with the added assistance of global
positioning satellites
and reports from passing ships the two
agencies can provide daily
updates on the position of icebergs in
the north atlantic
individual vessels also have a much
easier time spotting icebergs in their
vicinity
thanks to technologies such as radar and
sonar becoming commonplace
these advancements have done a great
deal to make sea travel a lot safer
but they aren't foolproof accidents can
still happen
so it's a good thing large vessels are
now required
to carry enough lifeboats for everyone
on board and the crews receive
training in proper evacuation procedures
modern ships are also required to have a
radio operator
on duty at all times that's good for
several reasons
one of them being that no one wants to
be the guy who slept through a crisis
the captain of the californian got fired
over missing the titanic's call
and he hadn't even been breaking any
rules
emergency radio calls have been
standardized to a greater extent than
they were in 1912.
additionally gps tracking means that if
a ship needs help
responders will know precisely where the
trouble is going down
pardon the pun rescue efforts are also
much more coordinated than they would
have been in the early 20th century
the coast guard maintains a variety of
emergency response vehicles
ranging from small boats and helicopters
to large ships and planes
they're also better able to coordinate
with and dispatch help from
other civilian and military traffic in
the area